2               1. Introduction



       300                                    300                                  300



       200                                    200                                  200
Wage                                   Wage                                 Wage



       50 100                                 50 100                               50 100


                 20   40     60   80                   2003   2006   2009                   1   2   3   4   5

                       Age                                    Year                          Education Level



FIGURE 1.1. Wage data, which contains income survey information for men
from the central Atlantic region of the United States. Left: wage as a function of
age. On average, wage increases with age until about 60 years of age, at which
point it begins to decline. Center: wage as a function of year. There is a slow
but steady increase of approximately $10,000 in the average wage between 2003
and 2009. Right: Boxplots displaying wage as a function of education, with 1
indicating the lowest level (no high school diploma) and 5 the highest level (an
advanced graduate degree). On average, wage increases with the level of education.

   We also have information regarding each employee’s education level and
the year in which the wage was earned. The center and right-hand panels
of Figure 1.1, which display wage as a function of both year and education,
indicate that both of these factors are associated with wage. Wages increase
by approximately $10,000, in a roughly linear (or straight-line) fashion,
between 2003 and 2009, though this rise is very slight relative to the vari-
ability in the data. Wages are also typically greater for individuals with
higher education levels: men with the lowest education level (1) tend to
have substantially lower wages than those with the highest education level
(5). Clearly, the most accurate prediction of a given man’s wage will be
obtained by combining his age, his education, and the year. In Chapter 3,
we discuss linear regression, which can be used to predict wage from this
data set. Ideally, we should predict wage in a way that accounts for the
non-linear relationship between wage and age. In Chapter 7, we discuss a
class of approaches for addressing this problem.


Stock Market Data
The Wage data involves predicting a continuous or quantitative output value.
This is often referred to as a regression problem. However, in certain cases
we may instead wish to predict a non-numerical value—that is, a categorical
or qualitative output. For example, in Chapter 4 we examine a stock market
data set that contains the daily movements in the Standard & Poor’s 500
(S&P) stock index over a 5-year period between 2001 and 2005. We refer
to this as the Smarket data. The goal is to predict whether the index will
increase or decrease on a given day, using the past 5 days’ percentage
changes in the index. Here the statistical learning problem does not involve
predicting a numerical value. Instead it involves predicting whether a given
                                                                                                                                    1. Introduction            3

                                   Yesterday                                        Two Days Previous                                    Three Days Previous
                           6                                                   6                                                    6




Percentage change in S&P                            Percentage change in S&P                             Percentage change in S&P
                           4                                                   4                                                    4


                           2                                                   2                                                    2


                           0                                                   0                                                    0


                           −2                                                  −2                                                   −2


                           −4                                                  −4                                                   −4



                                Down         Up                                      Down         Up                                       Down         Up

                                Today’s Direction                                    Today’s Direction                                     Today’s Direction


 FIGURE 1.2. Left: Boxplots of the previous day’s percentage change in the S&P
 index for the days for which the market increased or decreased, obtained from the
 Smarket data. Center and Right: Same as left panel, but the percentage changes
 for 2 and 3 days previous are shown.


 day’s stock market performance will fall into the Up bucket or the Down
 bucket. This is known as a classification problem. A model that could
 accurately predict the direction in which the market will move would be
 very useful!
    The left-hand panel of Figure 1.2 displays two boxplots of the previous
 day’s percentage changes in the stock index: one for the 648 days for which
 the market increased on the subsequent day, and one for the 602 days for
 which the market decreased. The two plots look almost identical, suggest-
 ing that there is no simple strategy for using yesterday’s movement in the
 S&P to predict today’s returns. The remaining panels, which display box-
 plots for the percentage changes 2 and 3 days previous to today, similarly
 indicate little association between past and present returns. Of course, this
 lack of pattern is to be expected: in the presence of strong correlations be-
 tween successive days’ returns, one could adopt a simple trading strategy
 to generate profits from the market. Nevertheless, in Chapter 4, we explore
 these data using several different statistical learning methods. Interestingly,
 there are hints of some weak trends in the data that suggest that, at least
 for this 5-year period, it is possible to correctly predict the direction of
 movement in the market approximately 60% of the time (Figure 1.3).



 Gene Expression Data
 The previous two applications illustrate data sets with both input and
 output variables. However, another important class of problems involves
 situations in which we only observe input variables, with no corresponding
 output. For example, in a marketing setting, we might have demographic
 information for a number of current or potential customers. We may wish to
 understand which types of customers are similar to each other by grouping
 individuals according to their observed characteristics. This is known as a
4     1. Introduction


                                                0.52




                        Predicted Probability
                                                0.50


                                                0.48


                                                0.46


                                                       Down            Up

                                                        Today’s Direction


FIGURE 1.3. We fit a quadratic discriminant analysis model to the subset
of the Smarket data corresponding to the 2001–2004 time period, and predicted
the probability of a stock market decrease using the 2005 data. On average, the
predicted probability of decrease is higher for the days in which the market does
decrease. Based on these results, we are able to correctly predict the direction of
movement in the market 60% of the time.


clustering problem. Unlike in the previous examples, here we are not trying
to predict an output variable.
   We devote Chapter 12 to a discussion of statistical learning methods
for problems in which no natural output variable is available. We consider
the NCI60 data set, which consists of 6,830 gene expression measurements
for each of 64 cancer cell lines. Instead of predicting a particular output
variable, we are interested in determining whether there are groups, or
clusters, among the cell lines based on their gene expression measurements.
This is a difficult question to address, in part because there are thousands
of gene expression measurements per cell line, making it hard to visualize
the data.
   The left-hand panel of Figure 1.4 addresses this problem by represent-
ing each of the 64 cell lines using just two numbers, Z1 and Z2 . These
are the first two principal components of the data, which summarize the
6,830 expression measurements for each cell line down to two numbers or
dimensions. While it is likely that this dimension reduction has resulted in
some loss of information, it is now possible to visually examine the data
for evidence of clustering. Deciding on the number of clusters is often a
difficult problem. But the left-hand panel of Figure 1.4 suggests at least
four groups of cell lines, which we have represented using separate colors.
   In this particular data set, it turns out that the cell lines correspond
to 14 different types of cancer. (However, this information was not used
to create the left-hand panel of Figure 1.4.) The right-hand panel of Fig-
ure 1.4 is identical to the left-hand panel, except that the 14 cancer types
are shown using distinct colored symbols. There is clear evidence that cell
lines with the same cancer type tend to be located near each other in this
two-dimensional representation. In addition, even though the cancer infor-
mation was not used to produce the left-hand panel, the clustering obtained
does bear some resemblance to some of the actual cancer types observed
in the right-hand panel. This provides some independent verification of the
accuracy of our clustering analysis.
                                                                      1. Introduction          5


     20                                             20



     0                                              0


Z2                                             Z2
     −20                                            −20



     −40                                            −40



     −60                                            −60

           −40   −20   0        20   40   60              −40   −20    0        20   40   60

                           Z1                                              Z1

FIGURE 1.4. Left: Representation of the NCI60 gene expression data set in
a two-dimensional space, Z1 and Z2 . Each point corresponds to one of the 64
cell lines. There appear to be four groups of cell lines, which we have represented
using different colors. Right: Same as left panel except that we have represented
each of the 14 different types of cancer using a different colored symbol. Cell lines
corresponding to the same cancer type tend to be nearby in the two-dimensional
space.


A Brief History of Statistical Learning
Though the term statistical learning is fairly new, many of the concepts that
underlie the field were developed long ago. At the beginning of the nine-
teenth century, the method of least squares was developed, implementing
the earliest form of what is now known as linear regression. The approach
was first successfully applied to problems in astronomy. Linear regression
is used for predicting quantitative values, such as an individual’s salary.
In order to predict qualitative values, such as whether a patient survives
or dies, or whether the stock market increases or decreases, linear discrim-
inant analysis was proposed in 1936. In the 1940s, various authors put
forth an alternative approach, logistic regression. In the early 1970s, the
term generalized linear model was developed to describe an entire class of
statistical learning methods that include both linear and logistic regression
as special cases.
   By the end of the 1970s, many more techniques for learning from data
were available. However, they were almost exclusively linear methods be-
cause fitting non-linear relationships was computationally difficult at the
time. By the 1980s, computing technology had finally improved sufficiently
that non-linear methods were no longer computationally prohibitive. In
the mid 1980s, classification and regression trees were developed, followed
shortly by generalized additive models. Neural networks gained popularity
in the 1980s, and support vector machines arose in the 1990s.
   Since that time, statistical learning has emerged as a new subfield in
statistics, focused on supervised and unsupervised modeling and prediction.
In recent years, progress in statistical learning has been marked by the
increasing availability of powerful and relatively user-friendly software, such
as the popular and freely available Python system. This has the potential to
continue the transformation of the field from a set of techniques used and
6     1. Introduction

developed by statisticians and computer scientists to an essential toolkit
for a much broader community.




This Book
The Elements of Statistical Learning (ESL) by Hastie, Tibshirani, and
Friedman was first published in 2001. Since that time, it has become an
important reference on the fundamentals of statistical machine learning.
Its success derives from its comprehensive and detailed treatment of many
important topics in statistical learning, as well as the fact that (relative to
many upper-level statistics textbooks) it is accessible to a wide audience.
However, the greatest factor behind the success of ESL has been its topical
nature. At the time of its publication, interest in the field of statistical
learning was starting to explode. ESL provided one of the first accessible
and comprehensive introductions to the topic.
   Since ESL was first published, the field of statistical learning has con-
tinued to flourish. The field’s expansion has taken two forms. The most
obvious growth has involved the development of new and improved statis-
tical learning approaches aimed at answering a range of scientific questions
across a number of fields. However, the field of statistical learning has
also expanded its audience. In the 1990s, increases in computational power
generated a surge of interest in the field from non-statisticians who were
eager to use cutting-edge statistical tools to analyze their data. Unfortu-
nately, the highly technical nature of these approaches meant that the user
community remained primarily restricted to experts in statistics, computer
science, and related fields with the training (and time) to understand and
implement them.
   In recent years, new and improved software packages have significantly
eased the implementation burden for many statistical learning methods.
At the same time, there has been growing recognition across a number of
fields, from business to health care to genetics to the social sciences and
beyond, that statistical learning is a powerful tool with important practical
applications. As a result, the field has moved from one of primarily academic
interest to a mainstream discipline, with an enormous potential audience.
This trend will surely continue with the increasing availability of enormous
quantities of data and the software to analyze it.
   The purpose of An Introduction to Statistical Learning (ISL) is to facili-
tate the transition of statistical learning from an academic to a mainstream
field. ISL is not intended to replace ESL, which is a far more comprehen-
sive text both in terms of the number of approaches considered and the
depth to which they are explored. We consider ESL to be an important
companion for professionals (with graduate degrees in statistics, machine
learning, or related fields) who need to understand the technical details
behind statistical learning approaches. However, the community of users of
statistical learning techniques has expanded to include individuals with a
wider range of interests and backgrounds. Therefore, there is a place for a
less technical and more accessible version of ESL.
                                                        1. Introduction    7

   In teaching these topics over the years, we have discovered that they are
of interest to master’s and PhD students in fields as disparate as business
administration, biology, and computer science, as well as to quantitatively-
oriented upper-division undergraduates. It is important for this diverse
group to be able to understand the models, intuitions, and strengths and
weaknesses of the various approaches. But for this audience, many of the
technical details behind statistical learning methods, such as optimiza-
tion algorithms and theoretical properties, are not of primary interest.
We believe that these students do not need a deep understanding of these
aspects in order to become informed users of the various methodologies, and
in order to contribute to their chosen fields through the use of statistical
learning tools.
   ISL is based on the following four premises.
  1. Many statistical learning methods are relevant and useful in a wide
     range of academic and non-academic disciplines, beyond just the sta-
     tistical sciences. We believe that many contemporary statistical learn-
     ing procedures should, and will, become as widely available and used
     as is currently the case for classical methods such as linear regres-
     sion. As a result, rather than attempting to consider every possible
     approach (an impossible task), we have concentrated on presenting
     the methods that we believe are most widely applicable.
  2. Statistical learning should not be viewed as a series of black boxes. No
     single approach will perform well in all possible applications. With-
     out understanding all of the cogs inside the box, or the interaction
     between those cogs, it is impossible to select the best box. Hence, we
     have attempted to carefully describe the model, intuition, assump-
     tions, and trade-offs behind each of the methods that we consider.
  3. While it is important to know what job is performed by each cog, it is
     not necessary to have the skills to construct the machine inside the
     box! Thus, we have minimized discussion of technical details related
     to fitting procedures and theoretical properties. We assume that the
     reader is comfortable with basic mathematical concepts, but we do
     not assume a graduate degree in the mathematical sciences. For in-
     stance, we have almost completely avoided the use of matrix algebra,
     and it is possible to understand the entire book without a detailed
     knowledge of matrices and vectors.
  4. We presume that the reader is interested in applying statistical learn-
     ing methods to real-world problems. In order to facilitate this, as well
     as to motivate the techniques discussed, we have devoted a section
     within each chapter to computer labs. In each lab, we walk the reader
     through a realistic application of the methods considered in that chap-
     ter. When we have taught this material in our courses, we have al-
     located roughly one-third of classroom time to working through the
     labs, and we have found them to be extremely useful. Many of the
     less computationally-oriented students who were initially intimidated
     by the labs got the hang of things over the course of the quarter or
     semester. This book originally appeared (2013, second edition 2021)
8     1. Introduction

      with computer labs written in the R language. Since then, there has
      been increasing demand for Python implementations of the impor-
      tant techniques in statistical learning. Consequently, this version has
      labs in Python. There are a rapidly growing number of Python pack-
      ages available, and by examination of the imports at the beginning of
      each lab, readers will see that we have carefully selected and used the
      most appropriate. We have also supplied some additional code and
      functionality in our package ISLP. However, the labs in ISL are self-
      contained, and can be skipped if the reader wishes to use a different
      software package or does not wish to apply the methods discussed to
      real-world problems.


Who Should Read This Book?
This book is intended for anyone who is interested in using modern statis-
tical methods for modeling and prediction from data. This group includes
scientists, engineers, data analysts, data scientists, and quants, but also less
technical individuals with degrees in non-quantitative fields such as the so-
cial sciences or business. We expect that the reader will have had at least
one elementary course in statistics. Background in linear regression is also
useful, though not required, since we review the key concepts behind linear
regression in Chapter 3. The mathematical level of this book is modest,
and a detailed knowledge of matrix operations is not required. This book
provides an introduction to Python. Previous exposure to a programming
language, such as MATLAB or R, is useful but not required.
   The first edition of this textbook has been used to teach master’s and
PhD students in business, economics, computer science, biology, earth sci-
ences, psychology, and many other areas of the physical and social sciences.
It has also been used to teach advanced undergraduates who have already
taken a course on linear regression. In the context of a more mathemat-
ically rigorous course in which ESL serves as the primary textbook, ISL
could be used as a supplementary text for teaching computational aspects
of the various approaches.


Notation and Simple Matrix Algebra
Choosing notation for a textbook is always a difficult task. For the most
part we adopt the same notational conventions as ESL.
   We will use n to represent the number of distinct data points, or observa-
tions, in our sample. We will let p denote the number of variables that are
available for use in making predictions. For example, the Wage data set con-
sists of 11 variables for 3,000 people, so we have n = 3,000 observations and
p = 11 variables (such as year, age, race, and more). Note that throughout
this book, we indicate variable names using colored font: Variable Name.
   In some examples, p might be quite large, such as on the order of thou-
sands or even millions; this situation arises quite often, for example, in the
analysis of modern biological data or web-based advertising data.
                                                            1. Introduction      9

  In general, we will let xij represent the value of the jth variable for the
ith observation, where i = 1, 2, . . . , n and j = 1, 2, . . . , p. Throughout this
book, i will be used to index the samples or observations (from 1 to n) and
j will be used to index the variables (from 1 to p). We let X denote an
n × p matrix whose (i, j)th element is xij . That is,
                                                     
                               x11 x12 . . . x1p
                              x21 x22 . . . x2p 
                                                     
                       X= .             ..  ..    ..  .
                              ..         .     .   . 
                               xn1 xn2 . . . xnp

For readers who are unfamiliar with matrices, it is useful to visualize X as
a spreadsheet of numbers with n rows and p columns.
   At times we will be interested in the rows of X, which we write as
x1 , x2 , . . . , xn . Here xi is a vector of length p, containing the p variable
measurements for the ith observation. That is,
                                            
                                             xi1
                                           xi2 
                                            
                                      xi =  .  .                          (1.1)
                                            .. 
                                             xip

(Vectors are by default represented as columns.) For example, for the Wage
data, xi is a vector of length 11, consisting of year, age, race, and other
values for the ith individual. At other times we will instead be interested
in the columns of X, which we write as x1 , x2 , . . . , xp . Each is a vector of
length n. That is,                   
                                      x1j
                                     x2j 
                                     
                               xj =  .  .
                                     .. 
                                          xnj
For example, for the Wage data, x1 contains the n = 3,000 values for year.
  Using this notation, the matrix X can be written as
                             '                 (
                         X = x1 x2 · · · xp ,

or                                     T
                                       x1
                                      xT2 
                                       
                                  X =  . .
                                       .. 
                                       xTn
The T notation denotes the transpose of a matrix or vector. So, for example,
                                                  
                              x11 x21 . . . xn1
                            x12 x22 . . . xn2 
                                                  
                    XT =  .         ..         ..  ,
                             ..      .          . 
                              x1p x2p . . . xnp
10      1. Introduction

while                              '                          (
                              xTi = xi1      xi2    ···    xip .
  We use yi to denote the ith observation of the variable on which we
wish to make predictions, such as wage. Hence, we write the set of all n
observations in vector form as
                                    
                                     y1
                                    y2 
                                    
                               y =  . .
                                    .. 
                                    yn

Then our observed data consists of {(x1 , y1 ), (x2 , y2 ), . . . , (xn , yn )}, where
each xi is a vector of length p. (If p = 1, then xi is simply a scalar.)
  In this text, a vector of length n will always be denoted in lower case
bold; e.g.                             
                                        a1
                                       a2 
                                       
                                 a =  . .
                                       .. 
                                               an
However, vectors that are not of length n (such as feature vectors of length
p, as in (1.1)) will be denoted in lower case normal font, e.g. a. Scalars will
also be denoted in lower case normal font, e.g. a. In the rare cases in which
these two uses for lower case normal font lead to ambiguity, we will clarify
which use is intended. Matrices will be denoted using bold capitals, such
as A. Random variables will be denoted using capital normal font, e.g. A,
regardless of their dimensions.
   Occasionally we will want to indicate the dimension of a particular object.
To indicate that an object is a scalar, we will use the notation a ∈ R. To
indicate that it is a vector of length k, we will use a ∈ Rk (or a ∈ Rn if
it is of length n). We will indicate that an object is an r × s matrix using
A ∈ Rr×s .
   We have avoided using matrix algebra whenever possible. However, in
a few instances it becomes too cumbersome to avoid it entirely. In these
rare instances it is important to understand the concept of multiplying
two matrices. Suppose that A ∈ Rr×d and B ∈ Rd×s . Then the product
of A and B is denoted AB. The (i, j)th element of AB is computed by
multiplying each element of the ith row of A ) by the corresponding element
of the jth column of B. That is, (AB)ij = k=1 aik bkj . As an example,
                                                 d

consider                   *     +              *      +
                             1 2                  5 6
                      A=              and B =            .
                             3 4                  7 8
Then
         *         +*         +       *                          + *       +
             1 2        5 6               1×5+2×7         1×6+2×8    19 22
 AB =                             =                               =          .
             3 4        7 8               3×5+4×7         3×6+4×8    43 50

Note that this operation produces an r × s matrix. It is only possible to
compute AB if the number of columns of A is the same as the number of
rows of B.
                                                        1. Introduction    11

Organization of This Book
Chapter 2 introduces the basic terminology and concepts behind statisti-
cal learning. This chapter also presents the K-nearest neighbor classifier, a
very simple method that works surprisingly well on many problems. Chap-
ters 3 and 4 cover classical linear methods for regression and classification.
In particular, Chapter 3 reviews linear regression, the fundamental start-
ing point for all regression methods. In Chapter 4 we discuss two of the
most important classical classification methods, logistic regression and lin-
ear discriminant analysis.
   A central problem in all statistical learning situations involves choosing
the best method for a given application. Hence, in Chapter 5 we intro-
duce cross-validation and the bootstrap, which can be used to estimate the
accuracy of a number of different methods in order to choose the best one.
   Much of the recent research in statistical learning has concentrated on
non-linear methods. However, linear methods often have advantages over
their non-linear competitors in terms of interpretability and sometimes also
accuracy. Hence, in Chapter 6 we consider a host of linear methods, both
classical and more modern, which offer potential improvements over stan-
dard linear regression. These include stepwise selection, ridge regression,
principal components regression, and the lasso.
   The remaining chapters move into the world of non-linear statistical
learning. We first introduce in Chapter 7 a number of non-linear meth-
ods that work well for problems with a single input variable. We then
show how these methods can be used to fit non-linear additive models for
which there is more than one input. In Chapter 8, we investigate tree-based
methods, including bagging, boosting, and random forests. Support vector
machines, a set of approaches for performing both linear and non-linear
classification, are discussed in Chapter 9. We cover deep learning, an ap-
proach for non-linear regression and classification that has received a lot
of attention in recent years, in Chapter 10. Chapter 11 explores survival
analysis, a regression approach that is specialized to the setting in which
the output variable is censored, i.e. not fully observed.
   In Chapter 12, we consider the unsupervised setting in which we have
input variables but no output variable. In particular, we present princi-
pal components analysis, K-means clustering, and hierarchical clustering.
Finally, in Chapter 13 we cover the very important topic of multiple hy-
pothesis testing.
   At the end of each chapter, we present one or more Python lab sections
in which we systematically work through applications of the various meth-
ods discussed in that chapter. These labs demonstrate the strengths and
weaknesses of the various approaches, and also provide a useful reference
for the syntax required to implement the various methods. The reader may
choose to work through the labs at their own pace, or the labs may be the
focus of group sessions as part of a classroom environment. Within each
Python lab, we present the results that we obtained when we performed the
lab at the time of writing this book. However, new versions of Python are
continuously released, and over time, the packages called in the labs will
be updated. Therefore, in the future, it is possible that the results shown in
12     1. Introduction


 Name                                       Description
 Auto            Gas mileage, horsepower, and other information for cars.
 Bikeshare       Hourly usage of a bike sharing program in Washington, DC.
 Boston          Housing values and other information about Boston census tracts.
 BrainCancer     Survival times for patients diagnosed with brain cancer.
 Caravan         Information about individuals offered caravan insurance.
 Carseats        Information about car seat sales in 400 stores.
 College         Demographic characteristics, tuition, and more for USA colleges.
 Credit          Information about credit card debt for 400 customers.
 Default         Customer default records for a credit card company.
 Fund            Returns of 2,000 hedge fund managers over 50 months.
 Hitters         Records and salaries for baseball players.
 Khan            Gene expression measurements for four cancer types.
 NCI60           Gene expression measurements for 64 cancer cell lines.
 NYSE            Returns, volatility, and volume for the New York Stock Exchange.
 OJ              Sales information for Citrus Hill and Minute Maid orange juice.
 Portfolio       Past values of financial assets, for use in portfolio allocation.
 Publication     Time to publication for 244 clinical trials.
 Smarket         Daily percentage returns for S&P 500 over a 5-year period.
 USArrests       Crime statistics per 100,000 residents in 50 states of USA.
 Wage            Income survey data for men in central Atlantic region of USA.
 Weekly          1,089 weekly stock market returns for 21 years.
TABLE 1.1. A list of data sets needed to perform the labs and exercises in this
textbook. All data sets are available in the ISLP package, with the exception of
USArrests, which is part of the base R distribution, but accessible from Python.

the lab sections may no longer correspond precisely to the results obtained
by the reader who performs the labs. As necessary, we will post updates to
the labs on the book website.
  We use the      symbol to denote sections or exercises that contain more
challenging concepts. These can be easily skipped by readers who do not
wish to delve as deeply into the material, or who lack the mathematical
background.


Data Sets Used in Labs and Exercises
In this textbook, we illustrate statistical learning methods using applica-
tions from marketing, finance, biology, and other areas. The ISLP package
contains a number of data sets that are required in order to perform the
labs and exercises associated with this book. One other data set is part of
the base R distribution (the USArrests data), and we show how to access it
from Python in Section 12.5.1. Table 1.1 contains a summary of the data
sets required to perform the labs and exercises. A couple of these data sets
are also available as text files on the book website, for use in Chapter 2.
                                                     1. Introduction   13

Book Website
The website for this book is located at
                         www.statlearning.com
It contains a number of resources, including the Python package associated
with this book, and some additional data sets.


Acknowledgements
A few of the plots in this book were taken from ESL: Figures 6.7, 8.3,
and 12.14. All other plots were produced for the R version of ISL, except
for Figure 13.10 which differs because of the Python software supporting
the plot.
2
Statistical Learning




2.1       What Is Statistical Learning?
In order to motivate our study of statistical learning, we begin with a simple
example. Suppose that we are statistical consultants hired by a client to
investigate the association between advertising and sales of a particular
product. The Advertising data set consists of the sales of that product
in 200 different markets, along with advertising budgets for the product in
each of those markets for three different media: TV, radio, and newspaper.
The data are displayed in Figure 2.1. It is not possible for our client to
directly increase sales of the product. On the other hand, they can control
the advertising expenditure in each of the three media. Therefore, if we
determine that there is an association between advertising and sales, then
we can instruct our client to adjust advertising budgets, thereby indirectly
increasing sales. In other words, our goal is to develop an accurate model
that can be used to predict sales on the basis of the three media budgets.
   In this setting, the advertising budgets are input variables while sales
                                                                                input
is an output variable. The input variables are typically denoted using the variable
symbol X, with a subscript to distinguish them. So X1 might be the TV output
budget, X2 the radio budget, and X3 the newspaper budget. The inputs variable
go by different names, such as predictors, independent variables, features,
                                                                                predictor
or sometimes just variables. The output variable—in this case, sales—is
                                                                                independent
often called the response or dependent variable, and is typically denoted variable
using the symbol Y . Throughout this book, we will use all of these terms feature
interchangeably.                                                                variable
   More generally, suppose that we observe a quantitative response Y and p response
different predictors, X1 , X2 , . . . , Xp . We assume that there is some dependent
relationship between Y and X = (X1 , X2 , . . . , Xp ), which can be written variable
in the very general form
                                Y = f (X) + ".                            (2.1)

© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023                                                     15
G. James et al., An Introduction to Statistical Learning, Springer Texts in Statistics,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-38747-0_2
16               2. Statistical Learning


        25                                                        25                                                   25



        20                                                        20                                                   20




Sales                                                     Sales                                                Sales
        15                                                        15                                                   15



        10                                                        10                                                   10



        5                                                         5                                                    5




             0     50     100        200       300                      0   10   20        30    40    50                    0    20    40   60   80   100

                                TV                                                Radio                                                 Newspaper




FIGURE 2.1. The Advertising data set. The plot displays sales, in thousands
of units, as a function of TV, radio, and newspaper budgets, in thousands of
dollars, for 200 different markets. In each plot we show the simple least squares
fit of sales to that variable, as described in Chapter 3. In other words, each blue
line represents a simple model that can be used to predict sales using TV, radio,
and newspaper, respectively.

Here f is some fixed but unknown function of X1 , . . . , Xp , and " is a random
error term, which is independent of X and has mean zero. In this formula- error term
tion, f represents the systematic information that X provides about Y .
                                                                                                                                                             systematic

                          80                                                                80

                          70                                                                70

                          60                                                                60


                 Income                                                           Income
                          50                                                                50

                          40                                                                40

                          30                                                                30

                          20                                                                20


                                10    12     14      16       18       20   22                    10    12     14       16       18    20    22

                                           Years of Education                                                Years of Education



FIGURE 2.2. The Income data set. Left: The red dots are the observed values
of income (in thousands of dollars) and years of education for 30 individuals.
Right: The blue curve represents the true underlying relationship between income
and years of education, which is generally unknown (but is known in this case
because the data were simulated). The black lines represent the error associated
with each observation. Note that some errors are positive (if an observation lies
above the blue curve) and some are negative (if an observation lies below the
curve). Overall, these errors have approximately mean zero.

        As another example, consider the left-hand panel of Figure 2.2, a plot of
income versus years of education for 30 individuals in the Income data set.
The plot suggests that one might be able to predict income using years of
education. However, the function f that connects the input variable to the
